Welcome, everyone to the Data Science Hangout. I'm your host,
Rachel Dempsey. But for anyone who's just joining for the first
time, this is an open space for current and aspiring data
science leaders to connect and chat about some of the more
human centric questions around data science leadership. But
really, it's just an opportunity to focus on questions that are
most important to you all as well. So you can jump in live or
questions in the chat. And we also have a Slido link so you
can ask questions anonymously, too. And Robert, I'm sure we'll
share that in the chat window in just a second here. But just a
quick note, this will be a recorded session. So we will
share up to YouTube for anyone that missed it. But I'm so
excited to be joined today by my co host Jacqueline Nolis, head
of data science at Saturn Cloud. And Jacqueline's led data
science, machine learning and AI projects also at Microsoft,
Adobe, Airbnb, and T-Mobile. And she's also co wrote the book on
building a career in data science. So happy to have you
here today. I would love to have you introduce yourself and maybe
just share a little bit about some of the work that you're
doing today.
Sure. So hi, everyone. I'm Jacqueline Nolis. Yes, I am a
little bit about me, I got an undergrad and master's in
mathematics. Then I went, I want to go get a job using data to
help businesses. And this was before data science was a term.
So I did that for a while. Then when I said, Nah, I want to go
to academia, I got a PhD said, No, I want to go back in the
industry. So then I consulted for many years, including at a
bunch of the companies Rachel mentioned. And then I recently
started, maybe not that recently anymore. I'm now the head of
data science at Saturn Cloud. And Saturn Cloud is a cloud
platform for data scientists to run Jupyter notebooks and things
like that and use Dask clusters for distributed computing. And I
will say I've used R for about 10 years now. And it's been a
really fun journey. And R is my favorite language to use these
days, even even if the company I currently am employed by is more
of a Python place.
And Jacqueline, I think it's also helpful for people maybe to
understand some of the projects that you work on at Saturn Cloud
as well and like what your team looks like to
Sure. Well, okay. So throughout my career, I have started to
lead data science teams. Like when I was a consultant, I
created a data science department on my company that
had like eight data scientists and managers managing. So like
that got very big. Then like when I went to T-Mobile and
helped consult there, I like helped them start their AI team.
So I've done a lot of helping teams start, and then growing up
teams. At Saturn Cloud, I'm actually because we are a
product for data scientists, I'm less of a like do analytics and
build models and more of like product development of like what
do data scientists like want? And, you know, how can we build
documentation and examples and like help our customers solve
their problems, that kind of work. And so that's what the
team I lead does now. But it's actually the thinking of it is
fairly similar. It's not as different as you'd expect from
purely I'm gonna arima a neural network kind of data science.
Awesome. So I get to ask the questions in the beginning when
people are thinking about what they want. So I'm curious, what's
something that you're really excited about in data science
right now?
Um, that is a great question. I think that I have found it
really fun to watch. And like the last three years, I would
say, maybe a little more than but it's gotten really easy to
use the most cutting edge models, I would think, like it
used to be that like, well, like, you know, way back when
like, well, you could use a linear regression or, or a
logistic regression, or maybe if you really put some work into it
a random forest, but if you want to do something advanced, you
need a blah, blah, blah. And now it's like, man, with PyTorch,
TensorFlow, XGBoost, like GBL, like they're really the
difference between the most powerful models and the
powerful models that are powerful enough that you can use
them on a day to day basis gotten really small. I think
that's really cool, because we have to, there's less like, oh,
you only use a blah, blah, blah, you haven't even tried to use a
blah, blah, like there's less of that, because we can all just
kind of use everything now. So it's just not as big of a deal.
So I appreciate that that is kind of not as much of the
conversation as I feel like it used to be. So maybe the thing
of data science is it feels like there's less gatekeeping than
there used to be. And I think that's great.
That's awesome. And I know I got to talk to you a little or I feel
like I got to talk to you at the RStudio webinar where we had the
building effective data science teams, even though that was
Julia interviewing you. But I something that I thought was
really interesting that from that conversation was this whole
idea of like distributed versus centralized data science teams.
And I know you had a kind of set idea on, on that. And I
think it'd be interesting for everyone to hear a bit more
about that, too.
Yeah, so I will actually tell a story around this. So this is
back when I was the head of a data science team at a
consulting firm. And some like, like some like one of these
Gartner reports, like Forrester kind of a company was asking us
like, what is your stance on distributed versus centralized
data science? Meaning? Do you think at a company, the data
scientists should all live on individual teams, like you
should have the data science marketing and the data science
blah, blah, blah? Or do you should you have one central data
science team that all the data science report to you? And
there's more like a consulting firm that kind of goes out and
helps. And at the time, when I was working on this, and we're
a consulting company, we didn't want to harm and offend anyone,
we did a very consulting company thing, we just said, you know,
we think there's, there's reasons why you'd want to use
all of them, you know, and we just kind of like asked them,
you know, and we just kind of like absolutely punted on like,
who's to say what is the right thing. And I actually held that
belief for, like in my heart for a fair amount of time, I'm like
different models for different companies, there's always a good
place for some, you know, and now in 2021, I feel actually
pretty definitively, like in most situations, the
decentralized method is better, which is to say, have your data
science teams really close to the people who are there helping
is better than having data scientists close to each other,
because the data scientists get close to each other, what do
they do, they really like talking to each other about
really complex models and building really complex things.
When you have the data scientists close to the teams
they're working on, then you actually can like solve the more
practical problems. Like I think there are uses for companies
having consultancy style data scientists going in and helping
with like the tricky stuff. But I do think it's better to have
data scientists scattered throughout.
And how, like, have you ever had to go from one way to the other
or to distribute everyone?
I think I have almost, well, like I've either been at like a
small company where like, we just have one data science team
because there's only 50 people. Or usually, well, actually, I've
kind of been on both. I've been at companies where there's just
one central data science team. And I've been on companies where
each team has its own data science team. I do think there
are times where all of them backfired. Like I've seen teams.
I worked at a certain, I consulted for a certain large
tech company. And they had within one product, they had like
10 data science teams all basically doing the same thing
all fighting with each other. And like, that's not a good use
of decentralizing. So I've kind of been on all of it. But yeah,
I think having your data scientists close to the people
they're trying to help is still like the generally right call.
Also, I don't know if you guys can hear it. My cat is super
loud and annoying. So I'm gonna go kick him out of the room.
And I'll be right back. One second.
Or just bring, bring the cat to the hangout.
Bruno says show us the cat.
That's next week. Yeah.
I follow up on that. And yeah, sure.
How
so specialization right to an extent is a positive thing. How
do you feel about having the person that is awesome at
forecasting sitting in just one of those business unit teams,
versus the person that right has spent a lot of time doing
cluster analysis and then and then figuring that out? Do you
see? Not that I disagree with you, or wholeheartedly, I'm just
looking at the other side of it. When you have these, these
individuals who are really, really good at things, and then
they get stuck kind of in a corner, which is great for that
team that has them, but not so great for everybody else in the
company. How do you see that that balance playing out? Or
have you seen a play out? Well, anywhere?
I think that that what you just said is the justification for
having some sort of internal consultancy. Like if you really
have a rockstar forecaster, put them on the team of people that
goes around and just talks to the other people to like get
their forecasting up. Like I think if you have 100 data
scientists at a company, you could have 10 or something who
are that style of like, I'm just going to go around and make all
of our forecasting better. And then the other 90 are actually
like, more in the field of doing it. I'd said, I think there's
actually a lot of risk to in having people specialize. I've
been in a lot of situations where like, and maybe it's just
because I tend to work at smaller companies, but like,
people think have a desire to specialize too quickly. And like,
oh, we're gonna have this person, like, there's so much
risk and having this one person be the forecast person, and
they're going to do forecasts and no one else knows how to do
forecasts, but that one person, like, then you, that person gets
bored of forecasting, if they quit, your company's really bad
position, you're much better off, I feel like, avoiding those
sorts of scenarios I'm making. So everyone knows a little
forecasting, or at least like, like 10% of the people know
forecast, and they can swap around rather than having
everyone only have one specialty. Like, I think, I
think I've seen occasionally problems where people don't
specialize enough, but much more often problems where people
specialize too much. And again, I think it really depends on
company size. So
how do you also have the team like, I'm imagining when it's
decentralized, and you said it's not as many data scientists,
it's all talking together, how do they also help train each
other on different topics, or, like, keep up to date on certain
things if you're working on a separate department?
I don't know, like, I think you can get clever with like Slack
channels and like monthly meetings where we all get
together and just socialize, right? Like, that's more about
like, creating human connections than it is about like having an
internalized process. But like, if everyone's friends, that
doesn't super matter. Because like, if somebody goes roggy,
you just go ask your friend. So that's more about like creating
human connections than like formal processes, I would say.
But I don't know, I think that like, also, like at some level,
like, I don't know, I usually learn more about data science
from blog posts than I do from co workers. So like, it's less
about having all your co workers talk necessarily some internal
information maybe but like a lot of it's also just like making
sure your data science teams have the time to go out and
learn new things and stay informed.
Thank you. I see there's an anonymous question that came in
that is Anaconda enterprise and our studio community at first
glance, they look feature equal if you had to choose one.
I mean, I'm here. I'm not on an Anaconda. I mean, I really like
I'm really happy with what we're sort of things we're doing at
Saturn Cloud. Like, I'm, I'm pretty happy with what we're
building there. But I do think, from what I have seen on the
Python community, it is just, it is a lot of work to try and
create it, get it to be as get it to be as, I don't know, nice
and social as we are one, for whatever reason, I think our
communities are just more like fun, chill places to be. But
again, I don't know, that's where I came from. So maybe I'm
biased.
I think that leads to like another question that I would
have is, like, how do you, how do you, how do you, how do you
would have as we wait for a few others to come in? But are you
pretty open across your team to like whatever tools people want
to use? Or how do you standardize on certain tools?
Okay, so I will say I, I have watched a lot of teams crash
into the ground, because there's one person who likes SPSS. And
so they know SPSS, so they're going to write an SPSM rather
than them learning the language everyone else uses. I have been
that person, not with SPSS, but with like F sharp, like I have,
I have committed that sin. And I have, I have personally crashed
projects to the ground because of this. I think there is a very
real risk of letting people go in and do whatever they want,
and then having chaos. I also think concurrently that if you
never let people use the tools they like your product, your
employees are sad. And also your product is less good because
people like particular things for a reason. So I think anytime
you put in a new technology, it is a group decision, it has to
be some level of group like thinking like, like, like the
last company I was with, like, we were primarily using Python,
and we're like, going to use R, and like, do we have enough
people to support R, blah, blah, blah, like, like, that is a
conversation and not just like, well, I like R, so I'm going to
use it. And I think this is especially hard if you're one of
the very early people on the team, because every time you make,
if you're the only data scientist and things start, every
decision you make about, well, I like this best is also a
decision for all the future people. So it really matters
that you think about this stuff. So I, I tend to lean on this, I
guess I lean more on the authoritarian, no, don't let
people use whatever they want, because I've watched it so much
pressure in the ground. And then I'd like try and fight that
back a little because I'm like, I gotta let people be happy, I
guess. So.
And I think, oh, sorry.
Oh, no problem. Do you mind if I ask a question?
Yeah, no.
Okay. Jacqueline, with the idea of the decentralized, I'm a big
proponent of that. One thing that I wish I could get to be
more successful is letting people move around a company. So
I've been successful over my career, actually getting
decentralized, but then often the groups, the managers over
the groups that have the data scientists don't want them to
ever move anywhere. And I'm not sure how to get more buy-in
from the higher executives to help push that along. So I think
that really helps build that community and the friendships
where you start getting the good collaboration without the
overlap. Do you have any tips there? I would love to hear.
No, but I will. Not do I not have tips, but I'll answer a
different question that's related to your question. So it
still sounds like I'm insightful. Well, I will first
say I've never actually done what you've described. I've been
working at one department of the company and then switched to a
different. I've always stayed in a particular team until I've
been like left, basically, for whatever reason. It's just not a
thing that I've really pursued. That said, I think what you're
describing is something I have dealt with a lot, which is when
I think there's a culture change that needs to happen at an
organization, and I don't know how to get people to notice
that. In your case, the culture changes, people lock in too
much on, hey, I like this employee, so they're going to
stay with me forever and not, hey, it's better to let people
move and grow. That helps everyone like the tragedy of
common style way. That is a culture change. I have a lot of
times been at companies where I'm like we are doing something
that is disadvantageous to our whole company, but the people at
the top don't understand it, and I need to help them do that.
Here's the bad news, which is I've been in lots of those
situations. I don't know how many of them I've actually
succeeded in getting anyone at a higher up than me to really
change a culture. I'm just a, I don't know, maybe you can
notice this about me. I'm a very outgoing and loud person, and
so I will really bring up these sorts of issues of like, hey,
when you let people go around more, things like that. And
occasionally I can get people above me to make changes, but
like more often than not, they're like, well, I don't
know, and it's just like there's a certain like power
imbalance where like I can never make people with more
power do things, and I've had to learn how to be very
strategic about deciding when to really push on stuff, when
to just let stuff go and not care about it, or when to say
this is so catastrophically bad, it is no longer worth it for
me to be here. So I don't know if I have necessarily tips on
how you can make those, get those sorts of changes to
happen, but what I would say is maybe the better question
isn't how can you make them happen, it's when you're in an
environment where you can't make the things you want to
happen, how do you react to that?
Yeah, actually, sorry. I've been in a lot of these
situations where I've had people above me really making
bad calls, including some like diversity stuff where like,
it's like, I just, yeah, it's very frustrating. Like I put a
lot of heart and soul into it and then just have people above
me be like, eh, no, and it's just like, yeah, it's very
demoralizing. So I'm getting a little worked up thinking about
it.
Wow, that's terrible leadership.
That's why I don't work for companies anymore.
I feel like this is an important topic to stay on for a little
bit and I'm curious if other people have other tips or
advice as well.
I will say the last five years of my career have in large part
been a form of me learning how to navigate these situations,
because I think that really, as you get to like principal
levels and up, it's just more and more, hey, the people at the
top have some ideas that maybe you don't agree with and what
are you going to do with that?
So, oh, not only they have ideas you don't agree with, they
hire you to fix those problems. And they're like, we want you
to fix these problems. Also, we won't let you fix these
problems. What are you going to do? And it's just like, that's
just a very, how to handle that has been a thing I've really
been focusing on.
And is that something that you also are training people that
work for you to do? Or like how to have those conversations?
A bit. A bit. I'm also trying to not be those people, right?
Like, I think there's just a certain amount of like, how can
I be a good leader and make sure that the people under me are
given both clear direction of what they want them to do and a
clear understanding of what they can and what I, as their
leader, can and cannot do and why. And make sure those are in
sync. And I really have been trying more on that. But I do
think training people to be good, navigating on that's
important as well.
Eric, I see you have a question you put into the chat, which I'm
not going to just read. So I'm going to ask if it's okay, if I
turn the mic over to you for a second.
Absolutely. First, Jacqueline, huge fan of yours. And I'm just
going to say TGIRL is just straight up amazing. I will keep
saying that forever. As a shiny enthusiast, I'm still, I even
watch a recording of your New York presentation just recently.
Amazing stuff. Anyway, it kind of leads to what I'm about to
talk about here is that I work with a lot of people that ask
for my strategic input, maybe scoping out a data science tool,
whether it's a package or a shiny app or things like that.
And I give them some high level recommendations, and they start
prototyping it. And this prototype can go quite quickly
from some of those just meant to show how something worked to
then they just build and build and build on top of it until you
get to a situation where the leadership wants to use this in
production. But it is most definitely not ready for
production because of some shortcuts they took and things
like that. So I guess from your experience, what have you done
to still encourage innovation in your teams or with your
colleagues? But yet, when you sense that maybe something's
about to get really popular really quickly, how to empower
those developers to think about, well, it's probably going to be
used in production. So I might want to shore up this area or
things like that. I don't know if you have thoughts about that.
So I will say that in a sense, this is actually very related to
the last question. And I think maybe every question anyone
asks on this chat, I'll be like, these are all the same
questions, right? But just in your case, it's like at some
level, people at your company have an incentive to put stuff
out the door because it makes them look good. And like, you
are helping customers, presumably, like presumably is
net benefit. You also have an incentive not to have this blow
up on its face or not to be tech that, you know, in the next
year, where suddenly you're like, oh, this is a huge hurdle.
And if we just put five, you know, extra minutes of effort in
so you have these different incentives, and it's kind of
your job to be the person to like, even if you don't have the
most power, you kind of have to do this thing of like, well,
how can I as a person who isn't have the most power, try and
guide the team to doing the right, the right thing. And I
think, because you can't just tell people, no, you can't roll
this out yet. The best thing you can do is really it's like,
this is like a like a soft power, like discussion sort of
a thing of like, well, let's talk about what the risks are
rolling it out here. And like, why we care about unit testing
and like these sorts of things. And as much as possible, a lot
of let's say it's a unit test, let's say, let's say you make a
cool API, and you haven't put a unit test in it, like, cool,
let's just put it in prod, something like unit test, you
could go to a person and be like, you really need to put
unit tests in it. And they'll be like, whatever, teach, like, I
don't know what that means. That sounds like a lot of work.
And the more you can both tell, like explain to them why, hey,
you're going to testing up support these things, blah, blah.
But then also, if you can actually like write some unit
tests, set up the scaffolding, like a lot of times the reasons
why people don't do things isn't because they don't want to
make stuff good. It's because they don't necessarily know how.
And sometimes even just setting up a little bit of the
scaffolding can really go a long way. And I think that's kind
of what I think about like a principal data scientist job.
It is like entirely to do that. It's to help like get people
started in the right direction. So like, write the first unit
test, think through what is the microservice architecture
going to look like, so we don't build up a giant monolith, like
just trying to do that kind of stuff in advance in a way that's
like a soft power. Look, let's just I showed you, let's just
see if we can do it. I think that's kind of like that kind of
stuff really helps.
Yeah, one follow up on that is I'm in an industry that
historically has been kind of lagging behind and thinking
about these newer ways of thinking about data science is a
very intricate field that we have lots of touches on just the
statistics side, but also the software development side, the
architecture design. And sometimes it's hard to get some
leaders to recognize that the skills that you literally just
mentioned of scoping things out correctly, getting them set up
correctly, instilling these principles early on is not
something that's in people's typical job descriptions for the
role I'm in. So sometimes it's, for me, it's sometimes been a
challenge to get these kind of skills recognized and valued
accordingly. So I don't know if you've experienced that.
Yeah, let me give a very concrete example of this. So as
I imagine most people on this call, no, it is generally best
if you have code in a shared repository that people commit
and push and pull. It is generally worse if you have a
data science team where everyone has everything on their own
laptop with no structure and different formats, like maybe
they run this report once a week, but if they threw away the
laptop, you have to rebuild the whole report. So I had one at
one of my consulting things I'd gone just from just from being
a team where everyone uses Git and we all have a clear system
with folders and blah, blah, blah, to a team of 30 data
scientists, 90% of them didn't use Git. Some of them, like I
said, use SPSS, blah, blah, blah. And that is bad. That is
bad for a lot of reasons. If someone were to leave, that
company would be really bad. We can't even keep track of what
code actually is running in prod because everyone has their
own stuff. Now, when I come in to be like, I objectively know
that the team I've just been working on before with Git and
folders and whatever, CICD, that is objectively better. But
to try and do the work of getting everyone to switch to
using Git and a shared language, that is a massive amount of
work. I could not do that. I don't even think, and I've
thought about this a lot, I don't even think the person
running that team of 20 could have gotten everyone to do that
because the problem was just so big at that point. Had they
started three years earlier, it would have been fine. But at
that point, 20 people, all these different systems, it just
would be very, very difficult. So I do think there's a certain
point of no return of like, we just have to accept that this is
not going to be a system that runs well and hope that as they
build future systems, it will. And as much as possible, trying
to catch stuff early so you don't get there too.
Absolutely. Thank you.
You're welcome. Man, thinking about this stuff, it's like,
whew, it's bringing back, like, man, imagine being on a team
with no Git and some people use SPSS. Like, I don't know.
So there's actually, there's an anonymous question that just
came in on how do you structure internal documentation or
communication channels so people can be empowered by the
internal data science team?
So I have maybe two hot takes that I think are maybe not
generally, like, standard, what people believe. One is I think
that a lot of times data science teams write too much
documentation. And two, I don't think they put it in the right
place or they don't think enough about what the right place for
it is, which is to say, let's say I am a data science team and
we have some stakeholders work with us. One thing you might say
is like, well, the stakeholders, he's asking us questions. So
what I'm going to do is I'm going to write like a doc on our
wiki page, and it's going to be a huge doc with every question
answered in it. And a data science team will spend weeks
building this giant repository of all this information. And
then what do you know? The first thing is no one looks at it
because it has too much information. Even if they did
look at it, everyone has new weird questions that show up. So
they, those docs wouldn't really answer it. The docs are
written to avoid having to take meetings and stuff with these
people. But in fact, you still have to take just as much
meetings. Now you've just spent weeks of time building
something that you then also have to maintain. So I think
there's a natural data science feeling of like, well, if I
just write everything down, people will stop talking to me
anymore. I don't think that is generally true. I think the
best kind of documentation data scientists can do is one for
themselves. I think within your code, having read me is having
your functions documented, having good testing, good
variable names. Like that's what I do really think helps
quite immensely. And making sure all this code lives in a
shared place where it's not like we have a GitHub repo for
one thing and a GitLab repo for another, blah, blah, blah.
Like just having things organized is just as valuable as
documented. And then the other thing I think is that, yeah,
you really can't document your way out of talking to
stakeholders. And the best thing you can do is just getting
it. So stakeholders know that what is the most effective way
to communicate with you? Is that if they have a request, you
drop it in the JIRA board? Is it, hey, there's this, this is
the project manager. They always take the meetings. Like
just having that clear system. So you can't minimize the work,
but by having it in a flow, you can at least like manage it as
opposed to fire drills requests coming everywhere. I think that
stuff is far, far more valuable than like, yeah, let's write
lots of docs.
What kind of system do you use for requests?
So I do think that you have a person on your team who's the
project manager person, and maybe that's actually a project
manager. Maybe that's the principal data scientist,
whatever, but someone whose job it is to triage requests. You
then have, when anyone has a request they want to make of
you, they either talk to that person or drop it in the JIRA
board or whatever board. And then that person looks at it,
tries to understand it, goes back to them, has a meeting
about it to really clean it up. And then from there, the data
science team tackles it. I think some sort of intake method
like that works best. I think creating a standard form that
they fill out, that kind of stuff doesn't really work
because every question will never fit into a form because
always have its weird edge cases. And I also think, yeah,
I think just having a person who everyone knows the point of
contact on this just makes it a lot easier. And like, I don't
know, I find that job really fun. I love talking to people
about what their problems are. Like, so it's not necessarily
like a bad job, but it is something where you should, you
should have one person who's really the point of contact on
it. So it's not like, well, some requests go to me and some
requests go to blah, blah, blah. And some, oh, they had to
have a lunch with this person back when people had lunch
together. Now they have an extra request. Like having one
clear point of contact really helps.
Thank you. Ian, I see you asked the question in the chat
around building a team up from scratch. Do you want to jump in
and add any more context to that one?
Sure. I, hi Jacqueline. I just wanted to know, you mentioned
going in, starting all of these teams from scratch. Was there a
common denominator, this common thing that you would
experience in companies where there's maybe not a data
centric culture or there's not a big understanding of what data
science is? Was there a common thing that, you know, hurdle or
something you had to overcome to kind of get buy-in or, you
know, just to even start the team off?
Yeah. So a couple of things. I mean, usually if they are
hiring you, there's got to be like some big buy-in at the
company in the sense of like, you wouldn't have been hired if
at least someone somewhere didn't think data science would
be useful. So I have, cause I guess I would, which is to say,
I used to worry that like, am I going to get buy-in for this?
That's kind of gone away. Usually it's like, there is
buy-in, but there's a total lack of idea of how to actually
make it work, which is to say, and I've had this happen a few
times where you come to a company, you start a team, but
the question is like, is there actually data we can use? Is
this data actually useful? Right? Like, so if they hire you
with the expectation of like, you're going to build machine
learning models on the revenue data to blah, blah, blah. And
then it turns out like two months in that, like, there's
not enough data here that you'd ever be able to build models on
it or stuff like that. That stuff keeps me up at night, but
I don't think there's any real way to solve it besides before
getting hired, really try and like probe on if this seems like
a good chance for data science and really just being flexible
with once you do start, like it may turn out that the actual
data science work you're doing isn't what you originally
expected. And it's just like, that's kind of the learning
experience of being the first one. I will also say to the
previous or earlier point, when you are the first data
scientist you do, you are the first data scientist, everything
you do sets a precedent. If you pick R or you pick Python, now
everyone's going to use R or Python. If you use the Git repo
or blah, blah, blah. Like, so it really, more than any other
time, you being careful about what you're doing is going to
pay off in the future. And also you have to, at the same time,
and here's the twist, you can't just be like, I'm going to
build a beautiful cathedral of Git repos, this CI, CD, blah,
blah, blah, because you'll spend the next six months of
your job setting up all this tooling, no one else to use it
yet. And after six months of not actually doing work and just
building tooling, you will be let go. And so it was all for
not. So it's like, it is like a strategic game of like, where
do you actually invest, given you can only do so much
investing while concurrently trying to produce revenue. I
think being the first data scientist is extremely fun, but
that is quite a stressful thing. And like, I don't know,
that's maybe not for everyone. Awesome. Thanks.
It sounds like maybe that has happened before where you get
there and you don't have the data that you actually need to
do what they want you to do. Like how, how did you actually
handle that?
Well, you have to have some real frank conversations with
your leadership about, Hey, you hired me to do things X, Y, and
Z, but think X, Y, and Z is impossible. Let's talk about
what is possible and how I can do it. And if you have a strong
set of leaders, they'll be like, you are a data science expert.
I trust you on that. Let's have that conversation and pivot.
And if they are weak leaders, they will say, well, you just
don't know enough about data science. We're going to keep
doing the same thing because we know more than you. And then
that is like a, I don't know, not great situation. Those are
the sorts of situations where like me being here, isn't
really right for me or you. So.
Yeah, definitely. Julia, I see you just put a question into the
chat as well on tips for denying requests. Would you want to jump
in and provide any other context for that one?
Sure, absolutely. So I work at a hospital where we have a fairly
new data science team. And the problem with hospitals is that
they tend to be very hierarchical in that everybody's
first idea is always would go as high up in the hierarchy as
possible to ask what we should solve. Whereas I maybe have the
understanding that the good ideas actually come from the
people who work with the patients and do all of the stuff
where whose work we're supposed to be helping. And I haven't
figured out a good way to triage where people I work with are not
necessarily comfortable saying to the high ups that this is
this might not be the best use of our resources. And I also am
not senior enough to maybe be able to do that myself. So if
you have any ideas on how to, as you say, like, try to bring the
reality into the conversation, that would be really cool.
So I will first say you said, well, I'm not necessarily
senior enough. I think that is a student observation, which is I
think a lot of times people get on these calls and do the way
like you can be the lowest person in a company. And if you
pitch your idea, just right, people are gonna love it. And
like, that's not really like, like, positions are real. And
sometimes being more senior gets stuff. So like, I think it is
good that you are aware that that stuff exists, and you're
navigating around that. That said, the most luck I have had
in these things, in these sorts of situations is just trying to
like pivot the pitch from not like, hey, more senior person,
you're wrong. And here's why. Although that's maybe how I feel
but much more like, hey, how can I show you, senior person,
the things I am seeing that are making me think that the more
junior way of doing things are, right? So like the senior
person, like we need to build a whole new data platform or
whatever. And you're like, no, we really just need to like, go
survey some hospital beds, right? Like the more you can be
like, well, let me explain why. Let me show you some data. Like
the more you can kind of, it's not like, hey, I need to change
your mind. It's like, I'm going to bring you into this new, even
better idea. Like that's kind of thinking helps, which is to
say, most of what you're kind of asking about, and I think has
repeatedly come up on this call is like, organizational dynamics
and like the things that have helped me the most of my career
get good at these are books on like negotiation and like
getting to yes and difficult conversations, just like
thinking, answering the question of how do I convince another
person to do the thing that I think we should do? Like that's
that is totally unrelated to data science and very much like
business philosophy, like argument, meta conversation, you
know, like, and I think just really thinking about it that
way and trying to look at those resources help. But like, it's
very tricky. And it's, um, I would love I would love more
than anything. I would answer be like, Oh, well, if you just
said these three words, then they have to do here's the code
words. But at least I have not yet found anything of the sort.
That was a that was a really good tip on the looking into the
negotiation literature and stuff like that. Thank you so
much. You're welcome.
Yeah, thank you. I was just saying in our little side note
clip that that portion that was really helpful to Trevor, I see
you just asked the question to around when you're the first
data scientist. Do you want to jump in and ask that one?
Hello, everyone. Very interesting conversation with
Jacqueline, right? So you spoke about being the first data
scientist in a company or a startup. It's the point that
you made about also, do you have the data that you need to do
data science? So I'm asking when you typically enter a
company, do they have the data already? And do they have it in
a way that it is useful? Or do you also have to think about
the structures that you need to put in place to get this data
to a stage where you can use it to build models? I don't know
what your experience has been like around that.
Yeah, so I think you're correct. And I think, yeah, you're the
first person that the data might not be in the right format for
you. And you need to figure out how to make it the right format,
you might have to build your own SQL database, you might have to
set up a cloud thing, like you have to do a lot more of that
work than if you're an established company. Sometimes
companies do have data engineering teams where they
have data scientists, you know, if they have been collecting
data, I know it's valuable. So like, the like, it doesn't
always end up being the case, but it is quite common. And I
think that's part of the tricky part of being a first data
scientist. I will also say that not only do you have to be a
data engineer, but I think you also have to be a data analyst,
which is a lot of your job as a first data scientist might just
be taking data from a CSV, summarizing it, making it into
one chart in a PDF file, and then emailing it to executive,
which I would argue is, it's not like data science work, it's
more like analytics. But like, that's part of your job, too.
And you're not going to get to always just build super cool
models when you're the first person. And I think that comes
with like the struggle of being the first is like, you never
know exactly what your job is going to be like, and you just
have to be ready to roll with whatever punch that will help
grow your team and your company. Also, you I don't know if you
guys have seen this, but I'm a very fidgety person. So I'm
picking up like the thermostats in my speaker and everything.
Yeah, so yeah, so could I ask a follow up question there?
Because if first data scientists, right, so the
assumption there is that the company that you're being hired
in, that they know what they want, right? So when they ask
for a data scientist, I mean, do you do you see them asking
for someone with a background in data engineering, or they
don't know what they're asking for?
I think I've seen almost every time I've started, been on the
start of a data science team, I think I would say 75% of the
time, they did not actually know what they wanted, they
knew they had data. And they knew that if you take data, it
somehow turns you into money or turns it to money. Like, you
know, they understood that from like, they read the Harvard
Business Review articles, but they don't really know much
more about that. And they know a data science person is the
kind of person who does that. And so you as the first hire may
have to come in and be like, actually, you don't even need
me yet, you need a data engineer, or actually, what you
really need is not data science, but analytics, right? Like
there's so many angles that could go. And like, that's just
how it is. And like, even companies that really seem like
they should know what they want from data scientists, sometimes
they just, unless you already have data science established,
you just you don't really know what it's going to be like.
Thank you. And shifting gears a little bit to hiring
conversation. I see Jeff, you just asked the question about
hiring new talent. Would you want to ask that live?
And I can read it as well. It says, as a data science leader,
what are the pros and cons of hiring new talent or trying to
upskill existing talent?
So I will say, I don't, I don't super, I don't super feel like
it's, um, it's like a binary, I guess, I always feel like I, I
binary, I guess, I always feel like I, as a leader, I always
want to be upskilling my employees, which is to say, at
every turn, I should be trying every day, regardless of
hiring other people or anything like that, I should always be
trying to make sure my employees are working on things that are
challenging them and helping them grow. And they learn new
skills, both because that gets me more things that they can
work on at the company. And it's good for them because they get
new skills and have presumably more fun doing it. So like, I
just, I think that the upskilling is just like a
perpetual push forward of people. And like, that's, like
never changes. When it comes to like the pros and cons of
hiring new talent of like, when is it valuable to your team, I
really struggle with this, because I do think that when you
hire more people than that, that actually is a really big
burden on your team, both like, you have to give them work to
do and make sure they are content and communicate with
them and have them communicate like that's a big draw. So I, I
think I tend to be a little bit more conservative in my hiring,
just because I find that terrifying. I'm more terrified
that and then I am terrified of not having enough people, which
is, I think, just my personal, like personality showing up. But
like, there's just, it's a very real calculation of like, how
much do you want to take on the risk of like, have not having
enough work and your team getting too big and blah, blah,
blah, versus the risk of missing opportunities, because they
didn't have people around. So that's kind of the challenge I'm
always balancing. I also have a blog, if you want to like,
literally, how do I like interview people and stuff, I do
have a blog post series, which is on my personal website, if
you scroll back in the blog enough that goes into all of
that. It's a little old, but like that thinking there. So
like, I've had that system pretty well figured out of like,
if I'm looking for a data scientist, how do I get them in
the real risk is just am I getting them in at the right
time?
Thank you. And we can add that blog post to the chat as well.
Or if we can find it, Robert, maybe.
It's pretty easy.
Awesome. And going back to the question right before this,
someone just asked if we could clarify maybe what is the
difference between a data scientist and a data analyst?
Oh, okay. Great question. I would say a data analyst job is
to take raw data and get it into a consumable format for an
executive, right? So if you have a SQL table, it's an
analyst job to turn it into an Excel file that has just the
summary monthly numbers and put that in a dashboard and these
sorts of things. This is a challenging job because like,
well, what are you doing with sales data? What about returned
objects? And what about this? And like, well, if we do that,
then that actually changes last month's numbers. And that would
be weird. Can we do that? Like, there's like a lot of work and
thought that has to be into getting executives that data.
A data scientist, in my opinion, is a person who is more
focused on, they get a data set in an abstract question of like,
why are my customers churning? What is the best offer to give
my customers? Things like that. And a data science job is to
like build models, do regressions, forecast, whatever,
to try and answer those things. So a data scientist is more
about using models to answer questions and like do inference,
whereas a data analyst doesn't really build models. They just
take data and group, aggregate, summarize, and visualize in
thoughtful ways that people within the company can use it.
And I think companies have like a thousand times more data
analysts work than data scientists work. And I think
there are a lot of data scientists there who like, I
would never do data analysts work. And I know because I used
to be one and I was very snobby about this early in my career.
And now I do a lot of it and it's fine. But like, there's
like a mental hurdle you have to get over of like, things
aren't less interesting or numerically challenging just
because they don't have a regression in them.
So on the topic of roles, I see, Will, you just asked a
question a few seconds ago. Would you want to ask that one
now?
Yeah, sure. So as far as data science roles, I guess teams,
you mentioned kind of a project manager earlier, data
engineer, data scientist. What do you recommend as far as
the types of roles in a data science team?
It's super depends on what your team is doing. If your
team is like primarily like making reports, doing analysis,
like doing an analytical, like trying to answer these
questions with data. That is different than you're building
actual models that are going into production, that sort of
thing. I think, I mean, obviously you need data
scientists. I think after you have like two or three data
scientists, you probably want to have like a principal person
or like this, a person who is like job it is to like coach
and help out on the other data scientists. So I think you
need a lot of that. I also do think having someone whose job
it is to do project management, which is could very well be
that principal. That's valuable too. I think having a manager
is good if you get big enough. Again, a principal style person
can also be a manager and a manager could be a project
manager. So there's all kind of overlap, but like, okay, so let
me, I'm going to start over. Here's what you need. You need
data scientists to do the work. You need someone whose job it
is to help those people technically when they're not
sure about stuff, which could be convincing them to do unit
tests or whatever, and checking for that. You need someone
who's a manager whose job it is to figure out that the work
coming in makes sense, right? Like a manager's job is to like,
hey, are we asking, are we working on the right stuff? Are
we asking right tests? Are our employees growing and are they
getting the right comp or whatever? Like that kind of
stuff. And you need someone who's a project manager, which
is like literally like, hey, person X from this department
asks us to do this. Does that request make sense? Do we need
to flesh it out? How does that fit into our like list of work?
That's like five roles on that team. A lot of those can be
bunched into the same person, but depending on what your
company is like, it may make sense to do that bunching
differently. In like the most abstract case, you have three
data scientists and manager, principal, project manager,
person does all the other stuff. But I think it really
depends. Thank you. So follow-up question from the
analysts and data science topic as well. If you're a data
analyst today, what tips do you have on making that transition
over to data science? So I think it's a lot about learning,
learning the regressions, learning the models, getting
more comfortable because analysts are more likely to use
SQL and Excel and those sorts of tools and R and Python. And the
more you can get comfortable with R and Python, the better
like there are boot camps, right? Like a data science
bootcamp is a thing designed to get you those skills you need
real quickly. It's also at some level. So it's at some level
getting those skills you are missing. But a lot of times
when people ask this question, it's because they are an
analyst and they aren't just in this stuff and they learn some
R in their free time and now they're trying to figure out,
but okay, but how do I actually get the better job? And then at
that point, it's a lot of like crafting your resume and stuff
to like actually like highlight that, hey, analyst work is very
similar to data science work. So look, it's not really much of
a stretch at all for you to switch positions. So at some
level, it's about like marketing yourself as it is as much about
getting the right skills and things like that, or using
internal opportunities. If you can switch teams and that sort
of thing to see if someone could switch you within your org to
get more work. I will say, I have a co-wrote a whole book
that has discussions about these sorts of things, and you can
get it at bestbook.cool with the offer code buildbook40% for
40% off.
Love it. On that topic as well, I just remembered there was a
question from earlier that I hadn't asked yet. And this might
be in your book too. But when you do determine that it's time
to leave a company, how do you explain that departure when
looking for the next job?
Okay, so we do have a whole chapter on leaving your company.
What I do is, I mean, I guess it like super depends if it like,
like, I think it's very one. Oftentimes, people don't even
ask because they don't see it like it's often not too real.
But if they do ask, you can be like, Hey, you know, I've been
at the company for a few years, and I was looking for a new
opportunity. And that's fine. And feel very cool. Got it. You
got bored. No problem. You can I've been in situations where
like, I actually left because of the stuff we talked about
earlier, like I have incredibly toxic boss or whatever. And like
what I do there is when I go to my interviews, I say, like,
well, why did you leave? I'm like, well, you know, after
being there for six months, they're just very clear that
there wasn't necessarily a fit in terms of what they wanted
data scientists to do. And that what I thought was the right
stuff to do. It just like wasn't a quite right fit. And that's
like a wink, wink, nudge, nudge for like, it was a bad talks
environment, but like no one questions that. So like, there's
a lot of there's a lot of ways you can say I don't like working
there anymore. That's still like middle class sound like look,
we're being professional and fun, aren't we? And I think
that you just kind of have to like, practice saying the words
a few times, then go into the meeting, and it's fine.
I like that, like actually practicing saying that out loud
first.
Yeah, gotta get Yeah, I gotta break it in a little.
There's a few other anonymous questions that just came in. So
I'll read them. One is if you're talking to an executive
leader, how would you explain the core value that a data
science team brings to the organization?
So how would I purse if like, I get asked into the office by a
CEO of big name company, like fortune 40 company, whatever.
And they're like, Jacqueline, what is data science? Why is
your company's data science? I would say, look, I'm going to
use my executive voice. Oh, yeah.
Let me grab my martini. So I would say, look, companies, you
generally collect lots of data, what products people are buying,
how they are using them, blah, blah, blah. You also have to
make a ton of decisions, both like in the abstract sense,
should we use that data to do stuff like, or in the abstract
sense of like, should we launch a new product or not? Like, or
like, like, that's just a decision we have to make. And
then like a very, like concrete day to day question of like,
Hey, should we send this customer this offer, blah, blah,
blah. You could totally make that decision in a vacuum. And
that's fine. And companies have done that for a long time. But
wouldn't it be a little bit better if you use all that data
to try and do things like, Hey, let's not send the customers
who will, who will purchase from us, regardless of if we give
them a coupon, let's not just hand them a coupon and lose
money. Right. So like, like, or, you know, when it comes to
that product, we can clearly tell from data that like that
product probably won't be helpful for people. Let's, let's
know that. And so I don't think data science ever gets you like
your company went from a failing company to a huge success of
data science. But I do think like you can like on the margin
improve your product a reasonable amount, and like
make things a bit better by having data science. So I don't
think like data science is the right thing for every company
to suddenly grow huge. But I really do think especially for
bigger companies with lots of data and lots of opportunities
to improve stuff, that data can be just a very nice way to kind
of flesh things out. That is my thank you. I'm running for
president.
So another question for you as president of data science, do
you have any tips for pitching machine learning projects to
non technical leadership, specifically a midsize company
that has not had a formal machine learning project in the
past? I think what I honestly think there is, that's less
about really can like machine learning projects can be huge
to implement, but they can be pretty fast to prove show that
they would be valuable, right? So if you have a, if your idea
is we're going to try and find customers and use machine
learning model for which, which coupon they're going to get, it
may be a huge effort to get the data sets all connected and
blah, blah, blah, and actually have this run every day. But
it's pretty quick to take a one time abstract of the data, run
a model on it and show, look, we think that these customers
would behave differently, right? Like, so like, with machine
learning, I feel like since so much of the work is actually the
productionizing, you can sometimes like under the radar,
do the work of proving it's valuable, then go shop that to
everyone be like, hey, isn't this cool? Wouldn't it be cool
if it happened every day automatically for our customers
and that at that point, I've made it very easy to get
executives who see a POC of machine learning to like buy in
it's the hard part is like just making sure you can actually
craft the POC in the first place. POC being proof of
concept. Thank you. I am I'm scrolling through to see if
there are other questions that I've missed so, so far. So feel
free to jump in live too.
Okay, I have another question about engineering. So I'm
curious how for your engineering needs, like putting
things into production or creating servers specifically
for your work? Are you? Do you have your data scientists are a
part of your team that can overlap between those two
worlds?
Yes, both the data scientists have to be involved in the
Yes, both the data scientists have to become they have to be
like, they don't have to like write like the best code in the
world and like C++, but they have to like, you know, be
comfortable with the idea of like a Docker container of a
unit test. And that stuff I have found it's not very hard to
teach a data scientist. I was a data scientist, you don't know
what know that stuff at one point. And now I do. I don't
think it's that hard. I think data scientists are sometimes
intimidated by that. And they need good mentorship. But I
don't think the actual knowledge is hard to learn. What is
critically important is that your team is partnered with an
engineering team, right? So whether you actually have
engineers within your group who will do this, or the engineers
who are going to be rolling this out, sit right next to you, or
you have everyday stand up things like that. Because if you
don't have that super good communication, it's just not
going to work both because you're the data scientists
aren't going to build something that the engineers use. But
also, the engineers will not be able to provide some of that
mentorship and like, hey, what do we look for in unit tests?
Or what do our Docker files? How do our Docker files, your
Docker containers roll out? So for machine learning stuff,
it's just essential that you have engineers and data
scientists very close together and collaborating.
How have you how have you gotten that to happen? It seems
hit and miss with with me, I can get certain people who seem to
speak like a very more traditional it and it works well
there. Sorry, how do you hire data scientists?
How do you get to the like that communication going better?
Again, I've not been totally successful unless the data
scientist is more intrinsically interested in like the more it
portions. I do think there is an intrinsic interest part. Like I
do think that stuff matters. But I also think what matters is,
is the engineering team, like doing this for your team as a
favor in their extra time if they have it, or is like part of
their core charter to help the data science team roll out data
science? Because I've been in both those situations. And
unless they're unless they are not like the thing they are
hired as engineers to do is support the data science team
is very hard to get them to care because like, I don't know,
people like talk like working with people who know their
stuff. So it's a lot easier for engineers to just keep you know,
not communicate. Similarly, data scientists are much happier
communicate with other data scientists and data engineers.
So it's really like levels above this, making sure that the two
teams are like the leaders are talking in the moment. And like
it's like, and it's not like just that engineering team does
eight things of which one eighth of that is support the
data science. I think that's what I need. It's a charter on
my engineering team. Okay.
I see Mikey just asked a question that came in. Do you
want to jump in live?
Sure, I can jump in live Jacqueline. I'm also a big fan
as well. And I know that I think you've talked about data
science consulting and you're becoming a data scientist
podcast at one point, but it's been a little while since I
listened to it. So I figured I might ask this question again.
And you mentioned that you worked in data science
consulting, you know, at one point in your career, I was
wondering if you have any sort of tips, tricks, best practices
that are unique to finding success as a data science
consultant, and in the consulting world, dealing with a
lot of non-technical stakeholders as well, the sales
process of selling your value. That's unique to being a
consultant as opposed to an employee.
Yeah. So I will say, I do talk about the book. I have like
loosely toyed with the idea of like writing like a, like a
five chapter ebook just on consulting data science, because
so many people have your question of like, I find this
stuff interesting. How would I, a data scientist get into
consulting? So consulting has a pattern like, okay, so super
high level, how do, how do companies hire people? They
have employees, full time employees, they have, it's
generally called like contractors or vendors who are
like, hey, we just need you for a certain number of months to
just work as like our team. And then they also have like
consultants, like more consulting consultants, like
we're bringing you in for a very specific task. So it is
possible to, as a individual, be in that last group of like
people know you as like, you're a good person for this kind of
stuff. So they're just going to bring you in. By far, by far,
the hardest part of all this is finding, getting companies to
know and trust you. And like, like finding the work is a
thousand times harder than doing the work. For me, I had
worked at consulting companies for many years. So like I had
built connections with like companies I'd consulted for as
part of one point. And then I was able to talk to them as an
individual. So like a lot of it is just how that is how I built
the network. There's multiple ways to build the network, or
like people you work with. And more than anything, what I
recommend if you're interested in this kind of stuff is like
try and find someone who would hire you, and then do it in your
free time, like do it in your evenings and weekends and that
sort of stuff. Because if you do it that way, it's like a nice
you're testing it out your and if it works, that's a nice side
income, which can be really valuable. And I recommend
charging like real, like charge more than just whatever your
hourly hourly is like double or triple that. And then if you do
that, and do that enough times, and you like it and stuff, then
you can start thinking about making it your full time life.
But that's a hard thing. I also think working at a consulting
firm is a very valuable way to learn these sorts of things in
terms of like, well, how do you make that first contract? And
what is the sales cycle like, there's just a lot to that, that
is unrelated to data science and just a standard consulting
thing. But like, it just takes time to like figure out the
beats of it. And it's something that it's helpful to like, try
and experience or like get an insight into how that works
before you go out on your own. And so that kind of stuff, which
is so which is to say that being a data science consultant is
very little about being a good data scientist and extremely
much about being a good salesperson thinking through
contracts, thinking about like, what's going to happen if this
company won't pay you for four months, like, it's like that
kind of management and all that kind of stuff, which can be fun
and eventually a very financially lucrative if you can
pull it off, but it is also tricky, and I no longer do it.
So did that answer your question? I don't know. Like, I
would write an ebook about this.
That's super helpful. Thank you, Jacqueline. And as we get
to the top of the hour, too, I just want to make sure to ask,
what's the best way for people to get in touch with you? If
they have follow-up questions, is it Twitter or LinkedIn?
A great question. I don't really check LinkedIn. Please
Twitter DM me at Sky Tetra, S-K-Y-E-T-E-T-R-A. That is the
best way to get it. And like a lot of my talks and blog posts
and stuff, I have all my personal websites. If you just
go to janeowles.com, you can see a lot of my past material.
Awesome. Thank you so much, Jacqueline. Are there any other
questions from anyone? I don't think I missed any from the
chat, but if so, please jump in.
Just seeing a lot of thank you so much, Jacqueline. That was
awesome. It was really fun chatting with you. I really
appreciate your time, and looking forward to hopefully
having you on here at a future session, too.
Perfect. Yes, this is a lot of fun, so thank you for inviting
me. It's mostly just getting to rant about stuff I like ranting
about, so it's great. Awesome. Thank you, Jacqueline. Have a
great rest of the day, everyone.